# One Last Round: A History of The Parting Glass

*Written by Spencer Elkington*

## A Tale Between Two Kingdoms

For centuries, England and Scotland have shared a [complicated and messy history](https://www.ool.co.uk/blog/history-rivalry-england-v-scotland/). Prior to their unification under the [Union of Crowns](https://archive.org/details/scotlandsrelatio0000ferg) and the end of the Tudor Dynasty in 1603, the two nations existed as hostile neighbors disputing over bordering agricultural territories. Rural communities along the border of the two nations often had little continuous support from their respective monarchies and were left to support and defend themselves. These pseudo-independent communities formed *clans*, with their own leadership heirarchies.

The lack of order along the Anglo-Scottish border, exasperated by constant formal conflicts between the Scottish and English monarchies, led to inter-clan conflicts over land and resources. To restore order along the border, the conflicting monarchies began offering formal Lordship to clan chiefs willing to act as *wardens* of the border. With this support, the border conflict formalized into a conflict between *wardens*, supported by the Crowns, and [border reivers](https://www.amazon.com/Steel-Bonnets-Anglo-Scottish-Border-Reivers-ebook/dp/B004UMRYAS/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=), clans who forwent monarchal support in favor of taking resources from neighboring clans through force and cunning.

[Sir John Carmichael of the Scottish West March](https://www.amazon.com/Steel-Bonnets-Anglo-Scottish-Border-Reivers-ebook/dp/B004UMRYAS/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=) was one such Warden who found himself in a position of favor with both the Scottish and English Crowns. With the support of both monarchies, the Carmichael clan had the support and organization to maintain order in and around the Scottish West March. A rivalry with a local reiver clan, the Armstrongs, ignited after a member of the Carmichael clan supposedly insulted an Armstrong in passing. This led to an equally-measured retaliation from the Armstrong clan.

> "On June 14 1600 Carmichael held a Warden meeting at Gretna with RIchard Lowther, the English Deputy. Meanwhile a band of Armstrongs and others were laying their plans at a football match; the ringleaders were Ringan's Tom Armstrong, Adam ("The Peckett") Scott, and Willie Kang Irvine, without whom no West March mischief could be complete. On the 16th, when Carmichael was riding from Annan to Langholm to hold a Warden court, they were waiting for him, fourteen Scots and two Englishmen. He rode for it, but they chased him and Ringan's Tom shot him down. Then they robbed the body, Willie Kang threw it over his crupper [a horse saddle] and they carried it to Lochmaben."
>
> [*The Steel Bonnets: The Story of the Anglo-Scottish Border Reivers*](https://www.amazon.com/Steel-Bonnets-Anglo-Scottish-Border-Reivers-ebook/dp/B004UMRYAS/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=)
by George MacDonald Fraser, 2008

Five years following Sir John Carmichael's murder in 1605, Sandie Armstrong was apprehended, tried, convicted, and hanged for his participation in the murder. It is believed that Sandie Armstrong was the author of a farewell letter containing a poem, now known as *Armstrong's Goodbye*, that formed the basis for [the first formal publication of *The Parting Glass* 95 years later](https://archive.org/stream/collectionoforig00rugg#page/6/mode/2up).

The words of *The Parting Glass*, even at the time of its' publication, are agnostic to the specifics of the Anglo-Scottish border conflicts. The lyrics - both those originating in *Armstrong's Goodbye* and lyrics developed through later iterations - speak more to the consequences of the conflict. With the cycles of violence that accompanied inter-clan conflicts, [it was often unusual for combatants to live to old age](https://www.amazon.com/Steel-Bonnets-Anglo-Scottish-Border-Reivers-ebook/dp/B004UMRYAS/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=).

The conflict-agnostic nature of the song has solidified its placement in a variety of contexts - particularly temporary and permanent sendings-off. The song has consistently remained a prevalent drinking song in the Scottish, English, and Irish cultures. Additionally, it has also been used in passings and remembrance. A recent instance of the song used in this context is [a performance of the Looking Glass made by Irish musician Hozier](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y-BmOhjbQ44) in remembrance of essential personell lost in the fight against the 2020 outbreak of COVID-19.

## Same Poem - New Tune

From its' origins as a poem, *The Parting Glass* (and its' prior iterations) were first set to *The Peacock*, [a folk tune native to the British Isles](http://www.justanothertune.com/html/partingglass.html). Variations of *The Looking Glass*, such as historical branches of the poem that did not make it into the modern rendition of the song, are often set to the same tune. In this regard, each iteration has functioned as a *contrafactum* - songs of different text set to the same tune. For a song that was slow to be formally compiled and published and was, following its' conception, usually spread through word-of-mouth as a drinking song, this is not unusual.

The musical attributes of *The Looking Glass* are shaped by its' role as a traditional drinking song. It is because of the context in which it is sung - often in informal group contexts - that the song is rarely accompanied by additional instruments. Additionally, informal contexts lead to informal performers, and the range of the song reflects that. A tight range allows for untrained performers to still sing the song well, as is common with drinking songs. In this regard, the song fits well with other drinking songs in the same culture, such as Aude Lang Syne.

The informality of performances means that *The Looking Glass* itself has very little standard performance attributes. The simple melody of the song means that it could be sung conjunctly or disjunctly. Much of the decision may lay in the context in which the song is sung. In a group setting, such as a bar, tavern, or pub, the practicality of getting a handful of drunk performers to stay on a single melody means the song is likely performed as a (drunkenly) disjunct melody. In a more formal context, though - for example, a soloist singing in remembrance - it would be sung as a conjunct melody.
